[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
Gaiam "Inspirations."
So whatever statistics you
read, unfortunately, divorce
is becoming more common
than long-lasting marriages.
So what is the breakdown
between men and women?
Joining us again is
Alison Armstrong,
back to answer more questions
about relationships.
Alison has spent the last 20
years educating men and women
on how to communicate better
and to master the relationships
between one another.
Welcome back to the show.
>>ALISON ARMSTRONG: Thanks.
I'm glad to be here.
>>LISA: Oh, we're
glad to have you.
>>ARMSTRONG: There's so much
more to be said about this.
>>LISA: I mean, you can talk
for hours and hours on this.
You have over the
20 years that you've
been doing workshops for people
and relationship workshops--
most of them for free, which has
been an enormous contribution
to our society.
So let's talk about the
stages of development
that you have broken
down with men.
Let's start with men.
>>ARMSTRONG: OK.
And we have found that these
stages will apply to a women
if she is engaged in a career.
So that masculine pursuit will
pull out the masculine in her.
And we discovered this
because we noticed
that we got imprinted as women.
We get imprinted
with a kind of man.
And then, what
works on him, when
we try to apply it to a man 10
or 20 years older than that,
it doesn't work at all.
And my girlfriend and I
were trying to distinguish--
do you know?
So some of them seem like boys,
and you have to treat them
like boys.
And some of them are
like guys, you know?
And then, there's the men.
They're the ones like, whoa,
what do you do with a man?
We know how to handle
guys, but what about men?
So this whole conversation
led into this whole field
of studying what happens to men
and how they actually change
in really predictable stages.
And the change has to do with
what they're focused on, right?
So testosterone
makes a brain focus.
And what we found out is
that men focus in stages.
>>LISA: OK.
Typically.
OK.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
And I think one of the things
I've really loved about my work
is how much this particular
topic contributes to men.
Because when they
hear about it, they
have compassion for themselves.
And they're like, oh, there's
nothing wrong with me.
>>LISA: Yes, it does.
It also contributes to
mothers with sons, hugely.
>>ARMSTRONG: It's
also information
that's useful if you're
going to hire someone.
Because the stage of development
that they're in will depend
upon what they need from their
work and what they can provide
and what they cannot do, no
matter how you pay them or how
you manage them.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
It's really important.
So the easiest way
to understand it
is if you start at the stage
that begins at puberty.
And we call those "knights,"
as in knights in shining armor.
The boys younger than that--
so up till puberty, from birth
to puberty-- they're "pages."
Let's go to Camelot.
So pages are the
wannabe knights.
>>LISA: OK.
Yes.
They're learning
how to be knights.
>>ARMSTRONG: They
want to be knights.
They dream of their own
horse, their driver's license.
They admire these
young men that are
having all these adventures.
And that's really the
focus of this stage.
It's all about adventure,
conquest, conquering, testing
of oneself, finding
out what you've
got, what are you made of,
pitting yourself, against--
>>LISA: Competition?
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes, absolutely.
Competition, just even
challenges-- solo challenges--
like a man against a wave.
>>LISA: Man versus wild.
>>ARMSTRONG: Man
versus wave, right?
And one of the mistakes that
we make with men this age is we
try to get them to be
more serious, to be more
responsible, to settle down.
>>LISA: Now, what age is that?
>>ARMSTRONG: So we're
talking from, basically,
around 12 years old--
puberty starts, on average,
11 and a half years old,
so it could be
nine, could be 14--
until late 20s, early 30s.
>>LISA: So mothers of sons
in around there, 12 to 14,
are trying to say
calm down, calm down.
That's never going to happen.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes,
and teachers are
trying to get them to sit down.
Sit down, shut up, and listen.
>>LISA: And they get in
trouble if they don't.
>>ARMSTRONG: And
they get in trouble.
And it's, from my
view, it's just cruel.
We are so not taking
care of our boys
by not understanding
that their instincts--
>>LISA: To get up, jump on top
of the desk with their pencils
and wave them around in the air.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
And it makes it so
they can't do something
that they don't see they're
going to learn something from,
they're going to
gain something from,
they're going to be
stronger, better,
faster, as a result of it.
Instead, we tell
them, just learn it.
How will I apply it?
It doesn't matter.
Just learn it.
It doesn't work.
I feel really fortunate,
as a mother of a son,
to have learned this
when he was real young.
And now that he's
almost 25, that I
understand he's still in the
adventure period of his life.
And so I just support
him in his adventures,
and I listen to his
adventures, and what skill
is he working on now, and
what is he conquering now?
And so I pick him
up from the airport
as he comes in from Indonesia
and on his way to Alaska.
And I'm not tense that he
isn't got the job that's
going to be the 20-year track.
I'm not tense about that.
I'm not worried.
I know when he gets--
>>LISA: And you're
OK with meeting him
at the airport for that
few hours of connection,
you're great with that,
rather than him coming home
for Thanksgiving or
something, right?
Yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
Why aren't you staying home?
Why are you-- no.
He's got to go.
And it's just good to
know that when he--
somewhere between 28
and 32 years old--
it's going to be
fulfilled, in large part.
Men always need adventure.
Some always need a lot of
adventure, like my dad.
But this focus on adventure,
it'll complete itself,
and then the focus
will shift to building.
So the focus shifts from
adventure and conquest
and conquering to building.
And that's when a
man becomes a prince.
And we picked that name
because a prince is not a king.
And he's painfully
aware of that.
>>LISA: Oh.
But he's not a
knight any longer.
>>ARMSTRONG: He's not
a knight any longer.
Now, he likes to have his fun.
He needs to blow off steam.
But the focus is find
the part of the world
that he's going to
be in charge of,
and set out and conquer
that, and make his way,
and establish himself.
>>LISA: Where he's going
to want to eventually build
the kingdom.
>>ARMSTRONG: Well,
that's the beginning
of building the kingdom.
>>LISA: So how long does
that prince phase last?
>>ARMSTRONG: About
a dozen years.
>>LISA: Ooh, that's
quite the phase.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
Except for it's about a
dozen years from the time
he figures out, where is he
going to build his kingdom?
>>LISA: Oh, so it
could last 20 years.
>>ARMSTRONG: It
It could last 30 years.
It happens in phases.
So the first phase, what
we call an early prince,
he's figuring out what
does he want to be king of?
And he might have to try
a lot of different things.
And he'll think it's in, right?
OK, this is it.
I'm going to be this.
And then he's like, ew.
That is awful.
>>LISA: That could have to
do with jobs, relationships.
Yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: Mm.
This is really about jobs.
>>LISA: Jobs, OK.
>>ARMSTRONG: This isn't
about relationships.
That's a different problem.
>>LISA: OK.
No, I know.
It's all about distinctions.
I got it.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
Yeah.
But it affects him.
Because once he
figures out where
he wants to build his kingdom,
then he has another choice.
Do I want to build
it alone, or do I
want to share the
building with another?
And this is a big choice.
And for some men, they already
know what they want to do.
It's just been obvious
for them all their lives.
For others-- I know
a man where he really
had to stop and think, which
way do I want to do this?
And he could see himself
doing it both ways,
and decided he
wanted to build with.
And so then, those
are the men who,
they're now middle princes.
They've got enough
accomplishment under their belt
that they feel like
they're on the path.
They picked the right path.
And now, they're
looking around for who's
going to come with me?
Who's going to support me?
Who's going in the
direction I'm going?
Who do I have an advantage
by being tied to that person?
Do you know?
>>LISA: So leverage happens.
>>ARMSTRONG: Exactly.
>>LISA: So early prince, middle
prince, then late prince.
What is that?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, late prince,
what we've noticed what happens
is a man spends about 10 years--
a solid 10, usually 12, years--
as a middle prince getting
the points up on the board,
establishing, establishing,
establishing, establishing.
Oh, my gosh.
They spend so much
time establishing.
And then, they see it.
>>LISA: What does
establishing look like?
What do you mean by that?
>>ARMSTRONG: It looks like
making a name for themselves,
carving out their career,
staking their claim.
This is mine.
>>LISA: I'm an expert in this.
>>ARMSTRONG: This
is where I rule.
Yes.
Exactly.
I'm the go-to guy for that.
Yeah, that's what it looks like.
And then, when enough
of that is done--
and you can hear men
talking about this,
it's really cool--
they're like, well,
there's just one more hill.
I'm almost there.
I'm so close.
And then, right when
it's so close, then
they feel like they can
let off the gas a little.
Their head comes up from
this intense focus where we
complain about not seeing them.
They start looking
around, start noticing
there's more happening in life
than just what I've been doing.
Hmm.
And that's a late Prince.
And they have a
lot of confidence,
like, I have got this.
I can afford to see
what else is happening.
>>LISA: Where would
marriage and kids
come in in that phase,
if they were to come in?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, if
they were to come in--
so he would be a man who wants
to build with, instead of wait
until it's built and
find the queen he
wants to present it to--
that would be the
opposite choice--
both marriage and
kids-- and we talk
about that in "The
Amazing Development
of Men, Second Edition."
>>LISA: It's so great, yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: So
marriage and kids
comes in with an expression.
And a woman has to listen very
closely for this expression--
I'm ready.
So he'll say, I'm finally
ready to be married,
or I feel like I'm
ready to be married.
And then that's when he's
looking for the woman who's
going to be his wife.
And his taste in companions
may completely change.
It's a different
set of standards.
Yeah, before that,
it's what's fun.
Now, it's who supports
me, and who can I
see being with for
the rest of my life?
We have enough of what
it takes to make it.
And then, kids
are another level.
Buying a house is another level.
Kids will come in when he feels
like I can take care of me,
I can take care of her,
and I have excess capacity.
I have room.
It's all about having room.
>>LISA: I can see
so many places here
where breakdowns have occurred.
[ALISON SIGHING HEAVILY]
So many places where
you marry the fun,
they don't become
the good mother.
Or you marry the good mother,
and they don't have any fun.
I can see so many places
where the breakdowns occur,
all the way through
having kids before you've
reached the later part
of the prince phase.
There's so many things here.
I can see where
the breakdowns that
have occurred along the way.
I'm sure people listening
are thinking, oh, god,
I wish I would have asked
myself that question
before I did that.
So I want to get
to the king phase
before I jump off topic,
which I'm good at.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah,
we'll go to kings
and what happens before then.
But the thing to
know is it's really
upsetting for both men and women
for those breakdowns to occur.
For a man, if he can't
make his wife happy,
he feels like a complete
failure in life.
And it'll have him
just stay at work.
Any place where he can succeed,
he'll stay there instead of
come home.
And women are
miserable because we
think it's because
they don't love us,
and they don't care
about us, and they're not
attracted to us anymore.
It's that weight that we gained.
And we don't know it has
nothing to do with that.
And then we may pressure men--
may-- we usually pressure men
to get married before they're
ready to get married.
And we'll do it by
threatening to leave.
And so he'll get married before
he's ready because he knows--
>>LISA: Either we get
married or we end this.
>>ARMSTRONG: Exactly.
And so he'll get
married because he
knows she's the one, even though
he's not ready to get married.
Bad things happen for that.
Or we'll get pregnant by
accident-- or on purpose--
because our clock
is ticking, and we
need to have a child now.
And that's a very real
biological pressure on women.
>>LISA: Too much estrogen.
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, it's not
too much estrogen, actually,
as falling levels of estrogen.
So as our-- a little sidebar
here--
we lose eggs.
>>LISA: Around the
late 20s, right?
>>ARMSTRONG: Actually,
before we're even born.
>>LISA: What?
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
We have the most eggs
ever when we're still
in our mother's tummy.
We have millions of eggs.
By the time we're born, we're
down to hundreds of thousands.
They keep disappearing,
disappearing.
They just dissolve-- poof.
They're gone.
Around 29 years old, the
estrogen that the eggs produce
has depleted enough that the
brain registers that, uh-oh.
There's an uh-oh goes
off in the brain.
Then the pressure begins.
I need to have a baby.
I need to get married.
Women in our culture thinks
it's because they're turning 30,
and that age sounds terrible.
No, it's your ovaries talking.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>ARMSTRONG: Then,
we keep losing them.
At around age 35, the
ones that we still have,
they call it degrading.
So the quality of
the eggs lessens.
This is when they want
to do amniocentesis
because of the
chromosome, birth defects.
So the clock is ticking
because of the loss
of estrogen because of
the loss of the eggs
that produce estrogen.
>>LISA: And then the estrogen
could drop off completely,
and you could say,
OK, forget it.
I'm not going to do it.
Or you can go and try and
find more estrogen somehow.
But then, when you get pregnant,
you get so much estrogen.
But let's stay on topic.
We're staying on topic.
So diffused.
We could talk about
anything at this moment.
>>ARMSTRONG: We could talk
about eggs and estrogen.
>>LISA: We're on a diving board.
Let's stay back.
>>ARMSTRONG: But we're
going to go back to stages.
But you can see, right?
So here's a woman whose clock's
ticking and a man who's saying,
I'm not ready yet.
And she's thinking, but if you
loved me, you would do this.
And he-- well, it has nothing
to do with loving you.
It has to do with my
ability to support you.
[GRATING NOISES]
Then he's a late prince.
He has all this confidence.
It looks like it's
going to turn out.
It's going to be great.
And then he wakes up one morning
wondering, does it matter?
>>LISA: Oh.
Uh-oh.
What does that--
>>ARMSTRONG: I'm so sorry.
I'm so sorry.
The rug is pulled
out from under him.
He goes into what
they call the tunnel.
And they called it the
tunnel because with each step
you take, it gets darker.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>ARMSTRONG: And this book,
"Keys to the Kingdom," you
get to be inside of a man's
head who's in the tunnel
and see what it's like to be
him and what he's plagued by,
which are all these
questions-- why did I do it?
Was it worth doing?
Is this really
what I want to be?
If you can imagine a
cake right before it's
completely baked in the
oven going, wait a second!
I didn't want to be a cake!
[LAUGHING]
I wanted to be a musician!
>>LISA: Then you take it
out, and the middle falls.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
So it's this existential
questioning that
arises and just plagues him.
And men think
they're going crazy.
And they lose all
their confidence.
They can't find themselves--
which, they make commitments
based on themselves,
so they can't
commit to anything.
So then they drive everybody
crazy because they can't even
pick out a restaurant.
>>LISA: Is this when
the man cave happens,
when they start developing and
acquiring toys and putting them
in the man cave?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, I think
that really starts at birth.
But this is, obviously, what
we call a midlife crisis.
And they'll go out and do
those things they always
wanted to do.
>>LISA: I've always wanted to
jump out of an airplane happens
and bungee jump or whatever.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah and
the women involved--
>>LISA: Buy a motorcycle.
>>ARMSTRONG: Buy a motorcycle,
or another one, or a faster
one, in my husband's case.
But they themselves
are miserable.
And they make the women
involved with them miserable.
Because as you and I have
talked about many times,
we thrive on connection,
and they disconnect.
>>LISA: So knowing
that, what do we do
to support them in that phase?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, It's going
to be the opposite of what
a woman's going to want to do.
>>LISA: Instinctually, OK.
Of course.
>>ARMSTRONG: Exactly.
Always.
If ever we had an instinct
that pulled for partnership,
I wouldn't have to do anything.
I could be in Colorado
riding horses, right?
All of our instincts pull
in the opposite direction
of partnership.
>>LISA: Thus the
high divorce rate.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
And this is a very common
time for divorces to happen.
Because the uncertainty
that he's generating,
coming from what's going on
with him, will frighten her.
And her tendency will want
to be to nail things down--
well, look at what you've
built. Look at all the time you
put into this.
Why would you want
to change now?
You know what
you're committed to.
It's what you've always
been committed to.
>>LISA: Press on the
gas pedal harder.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes,
and box him in.
>>LISA: Then you add
in financial crises,
and you add in some
sickness and illness.
And then it all
goes away, right?
It's a mess.
>>ARMSTRONG: It's hideous.
Or it could be worse.
>>LISA: Really?
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
Yeah.
So he needs support,
which means, really,
being his friend.
Care about him for himself.
And begin your own transition.
He's going to become a king.
Focus on becoming a queen.
Yes.
There's a job for a woman to
do during that period of time.
And that's what "Keys to
the Kingdom" is about.
So he's going through it.
She finds a mentor
who supports her
in her own process to come out
on the other side together.
>>LISA: Or girlfriends or girl
time or mother-daughter stuff.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
Yes.
But you've got to
shift from nurturing,
which is what a woman may
have been doing for 15 years,
to receiving.
Because when he
comes out a king,
he's going to shift from
building to providing.
>>LISA: When he
comes out of king?
>>ARMSTRONG: When
he comes out a king.
So he goes through the tunnel.
>>LISA: OK.
He goes through the tunnel.
>>ARMSTRONG: He goes
through the tunnel.
It could last six months.
It could last three years.
Some men get stuck
there forever.
When he comes out, he comes
out with, this is who I am.
This is what I want to give.
Who wants it?
And if his woman is still
trying to give to him
instead of receive
from him and be
willing to admire him and
appreciate him and allow
him to provide for her--
if she's still saying,
I can do that, no,
I can do it, you
don't need to do
that, I can do that--
if she's still saying
that all the time--
he now needs to provide.
He's as compelled to
provide as he was to build
as he was to seek adventure.
He needs to provide for someone.
>>LISA: So allow him to
provide, and receive.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
If you don't, it'll blow up.
He also, when he
comes out a king,
he's not going to
tolerate the emasculation
that he tolerated as a prince.
>>LISA: Oh.
That's a great point.
>>ARMSTRONG: That's
another way it blows up.
>>LISA: Wow.
All right.
So now we get to go from--
this is so beautiful.
And I love that you have
described this so clearly.
And it's all--
however-many CD set
that is of "Amazing
Development of Men."
It's all in there.
My husband's listened to it.
And the "Keys to
the Kingdom" book.
But now, you go
through a great stage
of explaining what the
cavewoman, caveman,
hunter-gatherer
relationship is and how
it applies to modern life.
We're going to take a
look at that in this video
to start off with.
>>ARMSTRONG: Oh,
that'll be great.
It's a great topic.
So guys, I want to
relieve you of something.
I want to relieve
you of something.
Because as a hunter, when
someone else is speaking,
you have two ways of listening.
You have two default listenings.
If they're fine,
you're listening--
what's the point?
That's where you're listening.
What's the point?
If they're upset,
you're listening--
what's the problem, Right?
What's the problem?
Both of these ways
of listening will
get in the way of your
relationships with women.
The first-- what's the point?--
will get in the way
of your relationships
with women because
there is no point.
There's no point.
[LAUGHTER]
There's really no point.
You don't have to remember
the berry markers.
You don't have to remember the
blue dress or the red dress
or 10:15 or 10:20.
You don't have to
remember any of that.
I recommend, however, that
you notice if it's absent.
If it's there,
everything's fine.
If she's not giving berry
markers, you're in trouble.
Because the way that it works is
we tell the people on our team
where the berries are.
In case something happens to me,
McCall can go get the berries.
But if I don't trust
McCall anymore,
I won't tell her
where the berries are.
So if a woman says to another
woman, how was the party?
and she's like,
oh, it was great,
I was wearing my blue dress,
and Susie had her pink one on,
and so-and-so and so-and-so
were there, all's well.
If a woman says to another
woman, how was the party?
It was fine-- uh-oh.
That means I don't trust you.
I'm not going to tell
you where my berries are.
You'll steal them.
I'm not going to give
you any information.
It was fine.
What were you wearing?
A dress.
[LAUGHTER]
Well, who else was there?
Everybody.
Lack of detail--
alarms should go off.
If a woman's giving plenty
of detail, all is well.
Do you have to remember it?
No.
Now, this also causes
problems because as a hunter,
as the man, not only do
you listen the point,
you speak the point.
Honey, how was your meeting?
How did it go?
He bought it.
Yeah?
Good, and?
Who was there?
Everybody.
And what did you say?
What I planned on.
Well, what-- what--
[STUTTERING]??
Tell me more.
And you're like, he bought it.
What else is there to say?
And we're like [SNIFFLING].
You don't want to share
your life with me.
[LAUGHTER]
You don't-- you don't
really-- he doesn't trust me.
He won't include me.
And then, she'll pick a fight,
and something terrible happens.
But that's what happens.
If you're not sharing your
berry markers with me,
you must not trust me.
Because you're a
hairy woman, you know?
You've got to remember that.
You're a hairy woman.
If you're not sharing your berry
markers, you don't trust me.
Oh, it's devastating.
So again, bringing it
back to what can you do?
As a man, you don't have to
remember the berry markers.
Remember there's no point.
It's in the messages
she trusts you.
>>LISA: As you were
saying, back then,
we didn't have camera phones.
>>ARMSTRONG: Right.
>>LISA: My husband goes to
the market, takes a picture.
Is it this one?
Thank god for those things.
>>ARMSTRONG: It's a miracle,
an absolute miracle.
>>LISA: Because why
are we so specific?
Well, and it just explained it.
Because we'll kill the
meal or the village if--
God forbid.
All right.
So how do you send--
or even get a guy to go to
the market in the first place
without having to ask him
and send him with a list?
Does that ever happen?
I never see that in the market.
Some men go to the market.
>>ARMSTRONG: Well,
for a long time,
I thought Greg wasn't
allowed in the market.
Because he'd go without
bread for three days,
and it would never occur
to him to go buy some.
That was my job.
But now, it's reversed.
Now, he goes to the market.
But what's really cute is he
always gets the same things.
>>LISA: Aha, yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: So I go to
the market looking at all
the possibilities, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: No.
Single focus.
He gets the exact same things
over and over and over again.
And that works.
He calls it keeping
the wheels on.
So he keeps the wheels on.
We all stay fed.
If I want something different,
I need to go to the market.
>>LISA: Well, that's
a good solution.
I know my husband does the same
thing-- the same staple things.
And he needs those things.
And sometimes I go to the
market and forget those things.
So it's a rule-- always
go get hot sauce.
Whenever you're at the
market, just get hot sauce.
Wherever you are, get hot sauce.
>>ARMSTRONG: I didn't know
John was into hot sauce.
>>LISA: He loves hot sauce.
>>ARMSTRONG: That's great.
He doesn't look like
a hot sauce guy.
That's a really
good thing to know.
>>LISA: He's totally
a hot sauce guy.
>>ARMSTRONG: All right.
>>LISA: What does that mean?
>>ARMSTRONG: I don't know.
He's just adorable.
>>LISA: He is.
OK.
So now, the meadow report.
That brings us to
the meadow report.
>>ARMSTRONG: Oh, my gosh.
And can we teach people how not
to trigger the meadow report?
>>LISA: Yeah.
Well, what is the meadow
report in the first place?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well,
the meadow report
is what I named a woman's
compulsion to report back.
She went out into the
world, and she comes back,
and she's got to tell
you everything she saw,
everything she thought,
everything she felt,
everything that was going
on with everybody else.
>>LISA: That everyone said.
And then they said
because she said.
>>ARMSTRONG: Mm-hmm.
The whole report.
>>LISA: And then she
said, and then she--
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
And we're compelled to do that.
And what I found
really interesting is,
again, it goes back to
this thing about accuracy
and about diffuse awareness.
So because of a
commitment to accuracy,
and because diffuse awareness
connects me to everything
and actually has me identify
with everything, when you
say to a woman, how are you?
she's got to accurately
report on how she is.
So she has to tell
you her mental state,
her physical state, and
her emotional state.
>>LISA: And what happened
to make you that way.
>>ARMSTRONG: And how each
one of the people who
are important to her are.
Because how they are is
part of how she is, right?
So she's going to report
on all these things.
And that's why, how are
you? takes a half an hour--
>>LISA: With women.
>>ARMSTRONG: --more-- to answer.
And so one of my favorite
things to teach people
is how to not trigger
the meadow report.
Berry markers are
about time and place.
Where is it, and when
do I need to be back?
When and where, right?
Berry markings is all about
the distinguishing details.
Because guess what?
You can't just bring any old
berry back from the meadow.
You could kill us.
Some berries are poisonous.
Some berries taste awful.
You gotta bring home
the right berries.
You gotta bring home the berry.
It's a little blue berry.
But it's got five
little knobs on it.
And it grows on a bush that's
never higher than this.
And it's always next to a river.
It's never going to be in
the middle of the meadow--
ever, ever-- that's
the poisonous one.
You want the one that's
always next to the water.
And if it's taller than
this, it's the wrong one.
No, that one tastes awful.
It's always on a short bush.
And the leaves are glossy--
not the fuzzy-leafed one.
You guys, you're already
going [WHISTLING]..
This is life and death.
You gotta bring home
the right berries.
I can't get to the market.
I need you to get
the tomato paste.
You can't just get
any old tomato paste.
You gotta get the
one with basil,
but Contadina with basil,
not Del Monte with basil.
It's kind of sour.
It'll wreck the whole meal.
So it's the one with the green
label with the red stripe.
And it's always about
a third of the way up
from the bottom of the stack.
And first, you'll
go down the aisle
past the cranberry juices
and the apple juices,
and then you'll get
to the canned goods.
Now, the first section
is tomato sauce.
Not sauce-- I need paste.
[LAUGHTER]
So go past the sauce until
you get to the paste.
And it's not the black
label with the green stripe.
That's the wrong stuff.
Now, this thing happens, OK?
Remember, I said
I'd tell you if we
think if we stop talking in the
middle of sentences or ideas,
something terrible
is going to happen?
So we know, there's a list about
this long of berry markings
that would adequately describe
the right tomato paste.
We know all the things
we need to tell you
about how to get the
right tomato paste
and find it in the meadow.
We get about this
far down the list.
We say, like, two things,
and you say, I got it, right?
The tension in our
bodies, right, ladies?
Right?
I mean, it just goes berserk.
We're just like--
it's such a conflict.
Because we know
saying anything more
is really going to tick you off.
And then my life
will be in danger,
which I'll explain later.
But if we don't give you
the rest of the details,
you might bring home the
poisonous tomato paste.
And then, you'll kill
the whole village,
and so my life is in
danger that way, too!
Ah!
So you know what we
usually like to do?
Call me when you get there!
Just forget it.
I'll get it myself.
Or we'll try to--
let me just tell you a
couple more things about it,
just a couple more things--
try to sneak in a
couple more markings.
How many of you can relate?
Most men's brains are not built
for the detail of a meadow
report.
>>LISA: They could care less.
>>ARMSTRONG: Their brain
just isn't built for it.
And they try to remember
the details, which,
if they remember to not
remember, then they'll do OK.
>>LISA: That's a skill.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah,
that's a skill.
But it's much better, instead,
to ask her the questions
that instead of tapping
into the meadow report tap
into what she's
passionate about.
>>LISA: So explain.
>>ARMSTRONG: OK.
So when a woman is talking about
what she's passionate about,
it actually causes for a man to
have a surge of testosterone.
Now, that may sound
scary to some women.
But testosterone is actually
what makes men feel good.
>>LISA: And the hero comes out.
>>ARMSTRONG: The hero comes out.
It gives him a
sense of well-being
that they can handle anything.
Men with low levels
of testosterone
are the cranky ones.
The high levels--
they're in good shape.
>>LISA: They're the providers.
They want to provide.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yes.
So testosterone's not
something to be afraid of.
So when a man's
listening to a woman talk
about something she's
passionate about,
he has a surge of
testosterone, and he
gets a sense of
well-being, which
is the opposite of what
happens to him when
she's giving the meadow report.
And he's like, aah, right?
So he's got to start
asking the right question.
And he's got to start
with finding out from her,
what is the right question?
OK?
So I have a friend.
The right question for her is,
what have you learned lately?
>>LISA: Oh.
So she asks that?
>>ARMSTRONG: No.
That's the question to ask her.
>>LISA: Oh, ask her.
>>ARMSTRONG: If you ask her,
what have you learned lately?
she'll come alive.
Because she loves
to learn, right?
If you ask me, when are
you going to Colorado?
>>LISA: Oh, you're excited.
You are excited about that.
>>ARMSTRONG: Right?
And you just tap
into my passion.
Or ask me about
my horses, right?
[WHOOSHING] I'm going
to go right there.
So it's one of the
most important things
to find out about any
woman and every woman
is what does she love
to be asked about?
And not only that it
taps into her passion,
but it has her feel like,
wow, you remembered me.
You care about me.
You're interested in me.
>>LISA: So just go
ahead and ask her,
what do you like
to be asked about?
And you would instantly
come up with Colorado.
I would instantly come up with
parenting or biking or whatever
my passions are.
OK.
We're going to hear from
some of the men now.
We want to take a look at
this video from a male's
perspective.
We've got two women
talking the whole time.
Let's hear what a male's
perspective is about all
of this.
>>AUDIENCE: I have
situations that
come up that refer to
these berry markers.
I have a friend that
came over to our house,
and she had a issue
in her relationship.
And she started to go on and
on, and it was this berry marker
kind of thing.
And I knew that she
needed to just do this,
but it never stopped.
And I started to
realize, you know what?
I'm getting frustrated.
And I was, OK, keep going.
And so finally, I
say, all right, fine.
We've done the berry marker,
but let's go to some kind
of solution-based system
because otherwise--
[LAUGHTER]
I mean, I understand you
need to release tension.
But otherwise, you keep
running in circles.
Because all you're
doing is talking
about the berry
markers, berry markers.
And you never get anywhere.
Because the next day,
it's the same problem.
And you keep talking just
about the berry markers
without ever getting to the
place of OK, let's deconstruct.
Let's see what can be done.
>>ARMSTRONG: Can I have
you pause a moment?
>>AUDIENCE: Yeah.
>>ARMSTRONG: I have a word
for what you're describing--
torture, right?
>>AUDIENCE: It is hard.
>>ARMSTRONG: Ladies, that is how
you torture a problem solver.
It's mean.
It's totally mean.
Remember, earlier, I said men
have two default listenings?
If we're fine, it's
what's the point?
If we're not fine, it's
what's the problem?
And this is another way where
our communication gets out
of sync.
Because as a woman,
what happens to us,
as a woman, because we're
gatherers, is our basket
gets full.
It gets very full.
And we need to
unload the basket.
And how we unload the basket is
just [GIBBERISH] and then I--
and did that and
then, we did that,
and then we did
that [GIBBERISH]..
I call it a meadow report.
It's a meadow report.
Or it might be a cave report
if we had to stay home all day.
But we've got to report.
And when the problem
solver is listening,
the problem solver wants to
analyze the problem in order
to be able to solve it.
So you will ask
clarifying questions.
What happens when you ask
that clarifying question,
it would be the equivalent
of someone's throwing up
and someone catches it in
a cup and pours it back
down their throat.
[AUDIENCE GROANING]
I think you're going
to remember this.
[LAUGHTER]
It really does that.
It goes-- [GAGGING SOUNDS].
And then, we're like
[MUFFLED NOISES]..
So what to do about it.
One thing, for the ladies, could
you hear how tortured he was?
Stop doing that to them.
Your girlfriends can take it
for about 10 times as long,
and then they'll
tell you to shut up.
If you're not going
to break up with him,
at least stop
complaining about him.
They'll eventually say that.
For you, when a woman
is giving her meadow
report, what I try
to tell men to do
is just remember,
hold the bucket.
OK?
I'm just holding the bucket.
This is how she's
going to get peaceful.
This is how she's going
to actually have space
to give a damn about me.
She's making unoccupied space.
This is good.
Just hold the bucket.
Hold the bucket.
Don't ask any questions.
What else about that?
Oh.
I strongly recommend
a time limit.
>>AUDIENCE: You've
got 10 minutes
to give me that meadow report?
>>ARMSTRONG: I
asked Greg, honey,
how long can a man
tolerate the meadow report?
How long of a meadow
report can you tolerate?
And he said, 15 minutes
if we're dating.
[LAUGHTER]
Meaning I'm on my
best behavior 'cause
you're the deer I'm
trying to catch.
>>ARMSTRONG: That's funny.
>>LISA: I love it.
Alison's sitting here
watching herself, laughing.
Because it's situational
comedy is what it is.
You need to have your
own stand-up Vegas show.
It's just what we all go
through every day of our lives.
Nobody puts it into such
good words and explanation.
So I hear other women do this.
I'm in the carpool.
I pick up my daughter.
She's in the car.
Her friend will
come up and say, hi,
and just blah, blah, into the
window, all over my daughter.
I really didn't need
to know all of that.
I hear women do the
meadow report to me,
and I get nauseated sometimes.
So poor men.
When we're in the
kitchen cooking dinner,
and we just blah,
and they're like,
I'm trying to watch
football or something.
So how do we cut back
now that we know that we
have the meadow report in us?
How do we cut back that need
for that precise detail--
because if I leave
it out, then I
might leave out a
piece of the evidence
that you could solve
the mystery with?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, the
point of all of this
is what I would call
instinct plus choice.
So if you know you
have an instinct that
compels you to be
accurate, that compels
you to report on yourself, that
compels you to give details,
then you can go, OK, and what's
going to make a difference?
What do I really need
him to know about me?
He has a limited capacity.
What do I need him
to know about me?
What will matter that
he knows about me?
>>LISA: But sometimes, as women,
we just need to talk it out.
Sometimes I talk a whole
scenario out of a problem
that I want him
to solve, but I've
solved it by the time I've
gotten to the end of talking
about all the perspectives.
>>ARMSTRONG: OK.
Well, the thing to do there,
it's all about setting him up,
OK?
So if you tell a
man, just listen--
this is really bad news, OK?--
if you tell a man, just listen,
he has a hormone in his body
that will turn the
testosterone into estrogen.
He's being emasculated
at the biological level.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
This is something
that I figured out
from teaming up with John
Gray from "Men Are from Mars."
>>LISA: Oh, so you just
don't do this to men.
You call your girlfriend.
>>ARMSTRONG: Do not
tell men, just listen.
It doesn't mean
they can't do it.
But you have to set
them up differently.
So what you say
instead is, you can
help me solve my problem
if you let me talk out
all my thoughts about it.
>>LISA: Brilliant!
>>ARMSTRONG: If you would
just be the blackboard
and let me talk this
out, you'll help me.
By becoming clear
about the problem,
you'll help me get
clear about the problem.
By the time I'm
done talking it out,
I'll either have the solution or
I'll know what to do to get it.
Would you help me like that?
So now, then, he's
sitting there.
Now, he's focused.
Talk it out.
Be the blackboard.
Be the blackboard, right?
And he's not
turning into a girl.
He's providing.
He's protecting you
from that problem.
He's providing the blackboard.
>>LISA: This is great.
It goes back to the point
in that first video.
There is no point.
There's no point to
the conversation.
Just listen.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
But he's listening to help her.
So that activates
all the masculine.
He's not listening,
cooling his jets.
Help her.
It will change everything.
He'll win.
He'll be all pumped up.
The testosterone surge
will come up in his body.
You'll smell it because
we can smell testosterone.
You'll get turned on.
>>LISA: What?
>>ARMSTRONG: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: Oh, seriously?
You're talking it out.
He's providing for you.
By the time you're
done, that was foreplay.
>>LISA: Wow!
It's solved.
Problem solved for both.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
Just because you
shifted it from,
just listen to, help me by
letting me talk this out.
>>LISA: OK.
Once again, difference
of communication.
So now, one of the
biggest traps men fall
into is when women say, do
I look fat in these pants?
Do not ever do that
to your man, right?
>>ARMSTRONG: That's so mean.
>>LISA: It's so mean.
>>ARMSTRONG: It's so mean.
And then, we want them
to be honest, right?
We'll bust him for
not being honest,
but then we ask him
something like that, right,
instead of saying
what we really need,
which is, I'm having a little
attack of self-esteem not doing
so good.
I'm having the worst possible
feeling a woman could ever
feel-- the feeling of fat.
It's the feeling we do
everything to avoid.
So could you tell me
what's beautiful about me?
Or could you remind me
why you love my butt?
Or ask for what we need.
Could you save me from
myself by telling me
what a great butt I have?
Then he can charge in.
>>LISA: Distract me, please.
Yes.
OK, this is why we are so
tortured by that question.
Take a look.
>>ARMSTRONG: We're
highly adaptable.
That's how we survive.
That's how a woman survives
is by being highly adaptable.
We will be anything we
think we need to be.
But the back of the hand
is weak sense of self.
We lose ourselves like that.
[SNAPPING] And women
say this all the time.
God, I lost myself in that job.
I lost myself in
that relationship.
I lost myself in my family.
Ladies, raise your hand
if you relate to this.
You lose yourself.
Keep your hands up.
You want the guys to see this.
Look around.
We lose ourselves all the time.
We have such a
weak sense of self.
This is why we're so
affected by criticism.
When a man is criticized,
you measure the criticism
against yourself.
We don't have that.
We just [GAGGING].
We're overwhelmed
by the criticism.
Because we are
externally motivated.
There's two things that make
us externally motivated.
One is what I just talked about,
that we think our life depends
upon pleasing you.
So we've got to become
whatever will please you.
The other thing that makes
us externally motivated
is diffuse awareness.
You tell us who I need to be.
My environment tells
me what I need to do.
I don't pick.
Can you see it?
Your criticism tells
me who I need to be.
And my environment tells
me what I need to do.
I don't choose.
I don't decide.
>>LISA: So yeah, we're
tortured by criticism
all around us, let
alone our own criticism.
But we don't want to hear
it from anyone else, right?
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah, and
we hear criticism in,
the green beans are
salty, which to a man
would be a statement of
fact, not a criticism.
And we're so different.
Men and women-- as it talks
about in the video, criticism
just goes right in and
causes us to change.
Men have all these layers
of protection, do you know?
And we've heard
them talk about it.
So when a man gets criticized,
the first thing he does
is consider the source.
Have you ever heard
a man say that?
Well, consider the source.
>>LISA: Right.
Of course.
Look who said that.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
So the first thing he does
is consider the source.
If he doesn't
respect the source,
it was like they passed gas.
Say, hmm.
A little stinky, then it's gone.
>>LISA: Doesn't matter.
>>ARMSTRONG: Really.
It has no effect.
If it's someone
that they respect,
OK, now it's worth considering--
still not acting
upon, but considering.
And how they consider it
is they check the criticism
against the sense
of their self, like
I talk about in that video.
If it doesn't fit their
sense of themselves--
they don't agree-- then
it's just regretful
that someone they respect
thinks that of them.
Hmm, that's too bad.
If they do agree--
like, oh, he really has
a point, I am that way--
he still doesn't act on it.
Now it's just up to be measured.
What would be the
advantage of changing that?
How much effort would it
take to change that, right?
And if there's a huge
advantage to changing it,
now it goes on the
list of things to do.
It doesn't mean he's
going to do it now.
Can you hear all the layers?
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>ARMSTRONG: It just goes
on the list of something
that would be worth changing.
If the benefit of
changing it does not
outweigh how much energy
it would take to change it,
then it's like, yeah, that's
something wrong with me.
>>ARMSTRONG: Criticism
changes women.
It changes women.
And as a man, it's
something to understand.
Because you may not have
meant to change her.
She wears a blue dress.
And you say, you
look prettier in red.
She'll never wear a
blue dress again--
never, not around you.
Can't do it.
She puts her own life in danger.
Women know this.
How you change another woman
is you just criticize her.
You go, Mary, really?
You've got red hair.
You're wearing pink?
Mary could never
wear pink again.
I'm just kidding, by the way.
I believe women with red
hair should wear pink.
Honest to goodness, I do.
But really, that's
all someone has
to do is just say that,
and boom, she's changed.
So guys, you can start to
make this connection, right?
If criticism changes
a woman, who do we
think criticism will change?
>>AUDIENCE: Men.
>>ARMSTRONG: A man!
A man!
That's why we criticize you.
We're trying to change you.
And we're shocked
that you don't change.
[LAUGHTER]
Really.
We're just stunned
that you don't change.
But you don't.
You don't change with criticism.
All criticism does to
you is causes distance.
That's all it does.
It's just, whoa.
OK.
Not safe here.
Doesn't like me.
I'm not OK with her.
I'm out of here.
It just causes distance.
>>LISA: My wonderful husband,
who is incredibly perfect,
does one thing--
one thing that bugs me.
>>ARMSTRONG: Only one thing.
>>LISA: Only one thing.
But he wears the same
tattered tank tops to parties.
>>ARMSTRONG: To parties?
Oh, interesting.
>>LISA: And I've
bought him many shirts.
He's going to kill me for this.
But how do I gently say--
other than, watch the show--
how do I gently say, would
you wear another tank top?
Because he doesn't care.
He is who he is, at
home, at a party.
He could care less.
And I love him for that.
So I've never said
anything because I don't
want to hurt his feelings.
And really, it's not
about the tank top.
But I'm talking to you about it.
Because maybe it is.
So how does--
>>ARMSTRONG: I got the question.
>>LISA: --any woman tell
their man in any situation,
I'd love you to do this?
You're perfect the way you
are, but if you did this,
it'd be awesome?
>>ARMSTRONG: Well, yeah,
it's all about points.
So honey, you know when
you wear the green shirt
or the blue shirt,
and we're at a party,
and I see you across the
room, I get turned on.
>>LISA: Aha.
That would work.
>>ARMSTRONG: That turns me on.
>>LISA: That would work.
>>ARMSTRONG: When you're
in your old tank tops
that you wear at
home, I understand
why you wear them at
home, but at a party,
it just doesn't do it for me.
Now there's an upside for him.
Now there's something
worth doing.
>>LISA: Rewards.
That is a very good point.
OK.
We just have a few
minutes left, but I
want to go to a subject
that is pressing
on a lot of people's
hearts, where money comes
in the way of a relationship.
It becomes the third party.
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
It's too bad.
>>LISA: Yeah.
So what happens when money
has disrupted a relationship
to the point of--
what advice could you
offer around that?
>>ARMSTRONG: And you want
the 30-second version, huh?
>>LISA: No, we've got
about two minutes.
>>ARMSTRONG: We've
got about two minutes.
All right.
OK.
So what the problems are are
problems of associating money
with power, that who makes
the money is the person who
gets to make decisions.
That will kill partnership.
Another problem is
one of accountability.
So women feel safe when other
people are being accountable.
Women feel free when other
And there's things we want to be
accountable for because that's
powerful.
So in the case of when my
husband was retired for four
years, I didn't mind
that I was the one who
was making the
money, but I still
needed him to be accountable.
And there were things that
were his job, and he had them,
and I didn't have to pay
any attention to them.
And he was providing
that for me.
That made me feel
like I was better off.
Unfortunately-- and probably
why 2/3 of the divorces
in California are
initiated by women--
when a man isn't providing
an equal or greater income,
and he isn't filling
it in with being
accountable for
other things that
make a difference in her
life, she'll start to think--
true or false-- that she's
better off without him.
And that's bad.
>>LISA: And so communication--
well, listening to this
is the first piece, and then
communicating about how can
you and I provide equally
in the relationship--
not having to do with
anything financially--
just how can we
support each other?
>>ARMSTRONG: Yeah.
You need to look at
accountabilities.
And there's also, when
men don't have jobs,
they still need to be
at work on something.
>>LISA: Great point.
>>ARMSTRONG: Because that is
what spends the testosterone.
That's what has them
smell good to us.
That's what earns our respect.
It doesn't necessarily
have to produce money,
but they have to be at work.
They're generating.
They're providing something.
>>LISA: So as you can see,
it's all about smelling good.
[LAUGHING]
That's what the
commercials tell you.
>>ARMSTRONG: [INHALING DEEPLY]
Testosterone.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
Yes.
The new fragrance--
testosterone.
Thank you so much.
And thank you so much.
I hope you've learned
as much as I have.
And if you'd like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Alison Armstrong or
share it with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]